Ex.2.2. Study on iptables and Firewalls in Linux

Aim:
To study and understand the working of iptables as a packet filtering and firewall utility in Linux.
Introduction:
A firewall in Linux acts as a security system that monitors and controls incoming and outgoing network traffic based on predefined rules. The most commonly used firewall tool in Linux is iptables, which is a user-space utility program that allows system administrators to configure the IP packet filter rules of the Linux kernel.
•	iptables works on the concept of tables, chains, and rules.
•	Tables contain chains, and chains contain rules that match packets and take actions (ACCEPT, DROP, REJECT, LOG).
•	It operates at the network and transport layers, making it suitable for packet filtering, NAT (Network Address Translation), and traffic redirection.
Benefits of iptables:
1.	Enhanced Security – Protects the system from unauthorized access and network attacks.
2.	Traffic Control – Allows administrators to permit, deny, or reroute traffic as needed.
3.	Packet Filtering – Filters packets based on IP address, port, protocol, or interface.
4.	Network Address Translation (NAT) – Enables sharing of a single public IP across multiple devices.
5.	Flexibility – Supports complex rules for different use cases (firewalling, port forwarding, logging).
6.	Logging & Auditing – Provides logging of network traffic for analysis.
Prerequisites:
•	A Linux system with root/administrative privileges.
•	Basic knowledge of networking concepts (IP addresses, ports, protocols).
•	Installed package: iptables (by default in most Linux distros, or can be installed via package manager).
Procedure:
1.	Check iptables installation:
Command: sudo iptables --version
2.	View current rules:
Command: sudo iptables -L -v -n
3.	Set default policies: (drop all incoming traffic, allow outgoing)
Command: sudo iptables -P INPUT DROP
sudo iptables -P OUTPUT ACCEPT sudo iptables -P FORWARD DROP
4.	Allow specific traffic: (allow SSH and HTTP)
Command: sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j ACCEPT sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 80 -j ACCEPT
5.	Drop unwanted traffic: (drop ping requests)
Command: sudo iptables -A INPUT -p icmp --icmp-type echo-request -j DROP
6.	Save the rules: (so they persist after reboot – depends on distro) Command:
On Debian/Ubuntu:
sudo iptables-save > /etc/iptables/rules.v4
On Arch:
sudo iptables-save | sudo tee /etc/iptables/iptables.rules > /dev/null
7.	Verify rules:
Command: sudo iptables -L -v -n
Rules Explanation:
Default Policies
➔	INPUT (policy DROP)
◆	By default, all incoming traffic is dropped unless explicitly allowed.
◆	This is a secure default because it blocks unknown/unauthorized connections.
➔	FORWARD (policy DROP)
◆	All forwarded packets (used in routing/NAT scenarios) are dropped.
◆	Since this system is not acting as a router, forwarding is disabled.
➔	OUTPUT (policy ACCEPT)
◆	All outgoing traffic is allowed by default.
◆	This means the system can freely initiate connections to the internet.
Configured Rules in INPUT Chain
➔	ACCEPT tcp -- anywhere anywhere tcp dpt:22
◆	Allows incoming SSH connections on port 22.
◆	This is essential for remote administration of the system.
➔	ACCEPT tcp -- anywhere anywhere tcp dpt:80
◆	Allows incoming HTTP traffic on port 80.
◆	This means the system can host a web server and accept requests from clients.
➔	DROP icmp -- anywhere anywhere icmp echo-request
◆	Drops all ICMP echo-requests (ping).
◆	This makes the system invisible to ping probes, improving security by preventing network reconnaissance.
Result:
The iptables firewall was configured with a default DROP policy for inbound traffic. Only SSH (22) and HTTP (80) are allowed, while ICMP echo requests are blocked. Outbound traffic is unrestricted, ensuring security with essential connectivity.
